CNN:


CNNs are a class of DLNN which is specifically used for processing data with a grid like topology such as images. It has multiple layers which automatically and adaptively learn the spatial hierarchies of features from input images.

Layers of CNN:

I/p layer
convolutional layer + ReLU
pooling layer
flatten layer
fully connected layer
o/p layer

The input image is converted to an matrix of numbers then we add padding to it which is of 0. Padding is basically line of 0s which is added on the outer side of the matrix. Then we take a filter or a kernel which is a small matrix and slide it over the input matrix and perform element wise multiplication and then summation is done. Stride is the number which determines the number of pixels sliding over the input matrix by the kernel. If the stride is small then a detailed output is generated and also takes more computation and is slower while if take more than 2 as the value for the stride then the computation is less and output is less detailed and it is faster. The output values are added to a new matrix which becomes the output matrix. Then we apply the ReLU activation function for adding non linearity. ReLU stands for rectified linear unit. The formula is max(0,x) if any value of the output matrix is not negative then it the output matrix will remain as it is. After this we go through the pooling layer which has 2 types of pooling methods which are max pooling and average pooling. A part of the output matrix is taken lets suppose a 2x2 matrix from the output matrix which is of 3x3 matrix. Now we apply either average pooling or max pooling. If we apply max pooling then we take the max number from the 2x2 matrix and if we apply average pooling then we sum all the numbers and divide by the total number of values of the 2x2 matrix to get the average value. Now the number we get is inserted to a new matrix which is of smaller size of the output matrix. This process is continued until all the values of the matrix are filled and then we convert the matrix to an array for the flatten layer. This array of numbers will be the input numbers for the neurons. Lets suppose we have 2 neurons then we perform the weighted sum for the 2 neurons. Weights are initialized randomly at the starting. Then we apply the SoftMax function to get the output probabilities which is in the o/p layer. The formula for the output layer is e^xi/summation(e^x) which means we apply this formula for the output weighted sum values and get 2 values for e^x1 and e^x2 and then we sum them and divide them to get the final probabilities. The probability which is the highest is considered as the final classification of the image. Also the SoftMax function is added because the weighted sum values are not between 0 and 1 which are not considered as the probability and also do not sum up as 1. As the main functionality of CNN is to find the final probability and if the final values are not probability then we to derive the probability. Also there can be multiple layers of convolution because more the layers then we can determine more features of the image. Also lets suppose there are 2 convolution layers then the input for the second layer is the output matrix of the first layer with the ReLU activation function.

There are multiple CNN architectures like AlexNet, ResNet, etc. but the main CNN architecture is the LeNet-5.

Dropout in CNN mainly happens in the FC layer as it has the most number of parameters. Dropout means some neurons are deactivated during the training process which means some neurons will not participate in the SoftMax function of the output layer. Also during backpropagation the neurons which were deactivated those neurons will not get their weights updated as they did not participate in the forward pass. Also when iteration comes a new set of neurons get deactivated. This is decided by the mask which consist of 0s and 1s. If the neuron comes under 1 then it will be active and if it comes under 0 then it will be not active. This is decided randomly with the probability of 0.5 which means 50% chances of getting active and not active. This is done for avoiding overfitting because all the neurons are connected to each other therefore they become dependent on each other we if do not apply dropout which is called as co adaption and their input will be dependent on the values of other neurons. So to avoid that and make the neurons work independently we apply dropout.