The encoder decoder architecture is a sequence to sequence architecture.

A sequence to sequence architecture means that it takes a sequence of words as input and generates a sequence of words as output.

In this type of architecture, there are 2 stages which is encoder stage and the other stage is decoder stage.

In encoder stage, it converts input to vector.

In decoder stage, it generates the output.

There are internal architecture of this type of architecture. In our case we are studying the encoder decoder architecture with Recurrent Neural Network(RNN) as the internal architecture.

There are more powerful architectures like the Transformer Architecture.

In the Internal Architecture for the encoder decoder with RNN, it ingests the input tokens one at a time and along with the state which represents the previously ingested tokens to produce the current state. This current state will then be used along with the next set of tokens to generate the next state. This state is used to make a vector which is the output to the Encoder Stage. This vector is sent to the Decoder Stage. In the decoder stage, it decodes the tokens one at a time also using the decoded state created using the previously decoded tokens.

Training Phase of Encoder Decoder Architecture with RNN as the internal architecture: In this type of training we provide with input output pair text. We provide the input text to the encoder which then produces a vector representation of it and sends it to the decoder. Then, the decoder generates the output text which is then compared with the original output text and with that we generate the error. Based on the error we reassign the weights to the RNN model. But there is catch in training of the decoder, While training along with the vector representation of the input text we also need to provide the previously generated token which was correct. We do not provide all the tokens but only those tokens which were generated by the decoder and was correct. Actually the decoder does not really generates the tokens, it only generates the probability of all the tokens. Then we apply different types of search algorithm to find the next token. Normally we apply the greedy search algorithm which basically chooses that token which has the highest probability. There are different types of search algorithm like the beam search. In beam search, we use the probabilities of the individual words generated by the decoder to generate the probability of chunks of word which can come next and we choose the most likely chunk of word. 

Serving Stage which is the stage where we generate the words using the model. We first prompt the model in text. This text goes to the encoder layer which it converts it to a vector representation which is then passed to the decoder stage along with a "GO" token. This is a special token which tells the decoder to generate the first word. Then the RNN replaces the previous state with the current state. Now the current state, vector representation of the input text and the special "GO" token is passed to the dense SoftMax layer to generate the probabilities. These probabilities are passed to the search algorithms like greedy search or beam search to generate the words. We repeat this process to generate the next words and finally our output is ready.

This encoder decoder architecture along with the RNN architecture as the internal architecture was made on 2014.

Now many advanced architectures are there like the encoder decoder architecture with the GPT 3 as the internal architecture.

